---
title: "Reflection on Sales"
tags: ["Sales", "Marketing", "Closing"]
description: "What it takes to be an effective salesman"
author: "Igor Tatarinov"
date: "2021-01-24"
---

"Oh this is a sales call, I'm sorry we're not interested". I remember getting this response from one receptionist before she even knew the product I was selling. These kind of responses were all too common when I first launched into my role as a Business Development Manager (BDM) at WoodConcept, a furniture export company based in Ho Chi Minh City. My job was simple: call the furniture retailers and wholesales in America and Australia, find out if they are importing products from Southeast Asia and see if we can work with them as their supplier. Simple yes, easy no.

No one likes to be on the receiving end of a cold sales call. Think about it. The phone rings, it's a strange number, you answer it and on the other end you hear a polite and professional voice that instantly rings the alarm bell: "They are trying to sell me something!". The salesman in modern times tends to get a bad rep. We all have that image of the used car salesman with oily slicked hair, cigar stub in his mouth, rubbing his fat hands together as he's trying to sell you a 1980 Pontiac with no wheels for \$100k (think Danny Devito starring in Matilda). Our normal thinking is that if the call is cold, the product or service must be useless. After all, if you knew that someone was really calling you with a "once in a lifetime opportunity" you'd probably be inclined to listen.

I thought about this often as I dialed the phone late at night, trying to get in the door of the international furniture market. Most people I spoke with were polite but I could feel them trying to get me off the phone as soon as possible. "Just send us the catalog we are super busy right now" is code for "I don't have any interest in talking with you". I remember feeling defeated even before picking up the phone but then I realized something: maybe the reason people felt this way was because I felt this way. Maybe their response was simply a reflection of how I felt about my own job. So I stopped seeing myself as a salesperson. I became a scientist, testing the way people responded to one another over the phone. I began to experiment with different approaches and different email templates. The email templates were of little help. People didn't really care what was in the email unless they needed our service at that time. And they often ended up in the customer's junk folder so unless we were willing to launch a mass email marketing campaign, spending time crafting unique emails did not make sense.

Talking on the phones, however, the result was different. I began to change my approach from formal to informal. "Hello, my name is Igor, I am the BDM at WoodConcept, we are a B2B furniture supplier in... " became "Hey good morning, can I talk to someone on your buying team about the wooden beds up on your website?" I realized the less I talked the better response I got. Short, sweet and to the point; people really liked that. Even if I could not reach the decision maker it became much easier to get their contact details from the receptionist. I was just a person calling to talk to someone. I never hid the truth; if people asked what the call was about I told them we are a supplier and we are interested working with them as their supplier. Here I did something that went against popular sales advice: I asked directly if they wanted to work with us. Most sales literature you read always advises you against openly asking the customer if they are interested. What if they say no? Game over. But in reality I found that people appreciated this style of being direct. If people felt like I was ready to walk when they said no, it added value to the call. And as long as they felt I wasn't trying to squeeze them into a corner and they had an open door, they were much more comfortable staying on the phone.

The other big takeaway was that there are no sales where there is no relationship. Unless the customer was actively searching for a supplier and I just happened to call at the right time (which happened once), it was bad strategy to try and close them on the first round. So I shifted my focus from trying to move them through our sales pipeline and instead engage them on topics not related to business at all. "Shoot the shit" as we say in America. I found that the less I tried to push people through our sales pipeline the more they went through it themselves. People are not stupid. They can feel when you are trying to move them through a sales process and nobody likes it. So I finally stopped thinking about my sales goals and instead tried to express some genuine interest in the person I was speaking with. It's not easy to do and it definitely doesn't work with everybody. Some people you click with right away, others no. But everyone can appreciate a friendly and honest approach. Yes this is a sales call, no I won't waste your time and you can always say no if you want. No fancy language, no slick sales techniques, just two people talking to on the phone.

And the results? I stayed with WoodConcept for 5 months and during that time, out of roughly a 1000 phone calls, I brought 4 new customers into the company. Of course this is a small number however we are talking about orders that average 50,000-80,000USD at a time. It's always a good feeling to know you earned your paycheck. And considering these customers never met anyone on our team face to face and everything was done via phone and email makes the closing all the sweeter.
